Real quick before we dive into async/await
let's just talk about what do those words even mean?
Asynchronous and synchronous,
you hear them thrown around a lot in JavaScript land,
but let's take a quick look at what that actually means.
So when you execute something synchronously
you wait for the task to be done
before you continue on with the rest of your actual code.
Where has when you do something asynchronously,
you start the task
but then you immediately move on to the next actual value.
That's why we can't do something like this
where we previously had say const response
is equal to fetch
and then fetched something from like https://github.com
and then the next line
immediately we try to console.log that response.
The reason why response is gonna be equal to a promise
and not the actual value is that
most things in JavaScript do not wait for anyone
meaning that they will execute the fetch,
however, they're not going to sit around
and pause all of JavaScript
and just wait until it comes back.
That's what's called blocking in JavaScript
where you block the rest of JavaScript from running
while you wait on this one single thing.
A good example of something that is blocking
is actually alert.
If we were to just start by
let's do a set interval
let's do something like every
one second or every 500 milliseconds
will run console.log date.now.
So let's see what we got here.
Good.
Now we're logging the current number of milliseconds,
every 500 milliseconds
but if I were to run alert("hi")
in the middle of this.
You notice how the console logging of date.now just stops?
That's because the alert is blocking
and is not letting anything else go on
and alert, in prompt, and confirm
they're some of the very few things
that actually do do that in JavaScript
and almost absolutely everything else in JavaScript
is asynchronous meaning that
you can launch something up
like for example if I were to try console.log hello.
It's just going to interpolate that
hello well this other stuff keeps on running
not a big deal for that to actually happen.
That is great but it becomes a problem
when we want flow control.
When we want one thing to happen
and then we wanna deal with the response
and then we wanna deal with the second response, right?
Just like we did with our native promises
where we first needed to wait
until we got access to the webcam
and then we wanted to set it to the actually
media and media stream.
Same thing when we did with our custom promises
review that we had here.
We ended up with this okay API
which is chaining then, then, then, then, then
one after another,
but we still don't have the ability
to do something like this.
Where I could just run
breathe, breathe, breathe, breathe, breathe, breathe
and after every single one
you would wait a second then run the next line,
wait a second then run the next line, wait a second
or wait for another ajax request
and then run the second ajax request.
You get the point right?
We need a way to essentially
not really pause JavaScript,
but just wait for a second
while the current line finishes executing
without having the downside of the alert
where you block all other JavaScript from running
cause you might have other background tasks,
notifications, downloading stuff,
listening for clicks on other items.
You don't wanna block all of JavaScript from running
just because you have this one piece of your application.
That is where async/await comes in
and why it's called async/await
is because you need to first make an asynchronous function
and then inside of that function you can await values.
Let's actually go back into our custom promises
and let's just take out this breathe function real quick
and let's go ahead and paste it in.
Now there's nothing that we need to do
to this breathe function
to make it async/await
because at the core
async/await is just built on top of promises.
It is not a alternative to promises,
it is not a totally different way of doing it.
You must have a function that is based on promises
in order to async/await anything.
That's why we have all these APIs
that are built on promises
and then we're going to be able to async/await
the actual values that come.
Good.
Don't touch that function at all.
The way it's gonna work is we're gonna say
await breathe(100)
and then we're going to await breathe(500)
and we're going to await breathe(5000).
You get the point right?
On and on and on one line after another
without any thens, without any callbacks, without anything
but this is what is called top level await.
We are not allowed to do this.
If I actually were to run this and refresh
it'll tell us await is only valid in an async function
because this await function
cannot just be done willy nilly out in the open.
It needs to be done in a function
that's been marked as async.
So what we're gonna do is we're gonna make a function.
I'll say function, we'll call it go()
and we can then inside of that await
and it's still gonna break,
but I'm gonna show you.
We'll say await,
we're going to await the breathe function
which is going to wait for 600 milliseconds.
Now we're still gonna get that error.
Await is only valid in an async function,
however, if we now mark this function as async
by just putting the word async
in front of the word function.
You can also mark a arrow function async
by doing things like const go is equal to async
and then it's just in a regular old arrow function
that we have there.
That's the way that you mark that.
Then we we are able to use the await inside of it.
So watch this.
If we console.log('start')
and console.log('end') in the middle.
Oh yeah, I guess we have to call this function
on page loader from the console or something like that.
Then we see start immediately
and then after one second we see end, right?
You notice there is no chaining of callbacks here,
there's no thens that we need to do,
there's no scoping that gets introduced,
it's all one level
and I could do these as long as I want.
We can also capture the value that this function returns.
If I were to say like const the response
is equal to await breathe,
in console.log the response.
Then I could do this a couple times over, why not?
600,
750, 900.
and we can't use response over and over and over again.
Why?
Because it's response two,
response three, and four cause there is a const there.
Good, start.
Uncaught console.logo.
What am I doing here?
Log.
Done.
See we're getting the values that are being resolved
from our promise function
and we're sticking them directly into
our actual variable there.
If I took this await off
breathe would return a promise,
but by putting the await in front of the promise
breathe will immediately return the promise,
but the await function will sort of just be like
all right everybody hold on for a couple seconds
I'm gonna wait until this breathe function
either resolves a value to me or rejects it
and in that case we have some sort of error.
So that's the very basics of how we do async/await.
The most important part that you need to know here
is that there is no top level await
meaning that you cannot just use await out in the open.
You cannot use await just anywhere
you must have to put an async on the word function.
That said sometimes I'm in just a regular old function
and I need to be able to wait for something.
It's no problem to make a function async
to be able to add just a single await inside of it.
There's no other detrimental effects that come of that.
Let's see it one more time,
working really nicely.
Now, what about this?
Where we have this problem if it's less than 500.
Let's make this 300
and we get an error.
Uncaught in promise that is too small of a value.
So the next video we're actually going to deal with
how do we catch that error if there is no
dot then then then catch in async/await.